welcome to topcast and to a spontaneous
episode I do have in the pipeline so to
speak some episodes on the fabric of
reality in particular and on the next
episode on Quantum computation part two
of dealing with that chapter from the
fabric of reality it's taking a little
more time than I first thought I'm
taking a deeper dive into Quantum
computation and some of the algorithms
that come along Quantum algorithms that
come along with Quantum computation as
well so there's that there's also the
next chapter in rationality the book by
Stephen Pinker which sometimes I think
to myself should have been called
irrationality for some of the errors
that are made but of course you know
he's not all wrong when it comes to what
counts as being reasonable what counts
as being rational however as we'll see
in the theme today that I explore
there's a severe lack of contact with
what I think is the deepest form of
epistemology and rationality that we
presently know anything that popper
wrote on the topic essentially but
people are I think sometimes trying to
deliberately avoid popper and I say
deliberately for reasons that I will
come to today because I'm going to be
exploring some Choice tweets that have
come across my feed over the last few
weeks some of which I haven't responded
to because there just seemed to be such
egregious errors that I continue to
stumble across day after day and week
after week and month after month but you
know misconception is everywhere and so
we should expect to find mistakes
everywhere and people are making
mistakes all over the place but should
some people be a little more informed
than others I would think so especially
if they're speaking on an area that they
claim some expertise in having said that
let me begin this episode by talking
about a tweet by Michael Nielsen Michael
Nielsen is a great physicist a renowned
writer of textbooks on Quantum
computation well the writer of possibly
the most famous of all textbooks on
Quantum computation one of the earliest
ones on the field sort of set the stage
for learning in the field really he's
written on technology broadly on deep
learning he's written another textbook
there as well his website is a treasure
Trove of resources
but curiously when it comes to
philosophy and epistemology I find
Michael Nelson to be extremely wide of
the mark and this is unusual it is
unusual in his particular case of
reasons that I'll come to shortly but I
just want to mention and flag up front
that I think that this is a peculiarity
of theoretical physics I find at times
it is the theoretical physicists who
tend to dive deep into epistemology
without knowing the first thing about it
but they think that because of what they
do their particular subject area that
gives them some special insight into how
science more broadly and knowledge
production Works in general but they
seem to get it wrong they get it wrong
in their own field as well as more
broadly now how could they possibly get
it wrong in their own field well I have
made this comparison before the
comparison is between the pilot and the
aircraft engineer on the one hand the
pilot knows something about how the
engines work but basically their job is
to get you from A to B to make the
actual prog Congress they don't need to
know how it is that they're achieving
what they're achieving at times
Einstein did have roughly the right
epistemology but even if he didn't even
if he didn't he still could have made
those same kind of discoveries now I
think in general if a scientist has the
right epistemology they can make
progress faster they can correct their
errors faster because they'll be a
little more critical about what they're
doing but there's no necessary linky
there's no necessity for a scientist to
understand the mechanics of the engine
if you like of how knowledge production
Works they can get along with doing the
knowledge production in the same way
that the pilot can fly the aircraft from
point A to point B without really
understanding the mechanics of how the
engine works on this metaphor that I'm
torturing it really is the case that the
philosopher of science the philosopher
of science who knows what they're doing
they are like the engineer they
understand how it is the combustion and
turbines actually work to produce thrust
to get the engine to push the aircraft
through the air from one place to
another and to cause the wings to give
it the lift that it needs now of course
there are lots of philosophers out there
that have entirely the wrong
epistemology they think that something
like the engines provide levitation and
anti-gravity force not really there's
something correct there but they're not
actually getting over gravity lift is
not exactly anti-gravity it's a
different thing okay there's a physical
Force there the philosopher of science
trained in preparing epistemology who
has an understanding let's say they
don't even need to be trained but has an
understanding of preparing epistemology
is going to be the engineer that
correctly grapples with how the thrust
is produced via combustion through the
turbine and the engine and all that sort
of stuff that goes on with a really
working engine in an actual aircraft
sometimes there are these rare unicorn
people like David Deutsch who are both
pilots and engineer they have expertise
in both areas but this is extremely rare
it's extremely rare for a single
individual to both know how to fly the
plane to do the physics and also have an
understanding of epistemology how the
engine does what it does but the
overwhelming majority of physicists
don't know philosophy and perhaps they
don't need to in order to get the thing
done that they want to do except when
they step outside of their own area and
they start opining on how knowledge is
produced then they begin to make
clangers and of course the reverse
happens all the time as well you know we
all know of the philosophers who are
egregiously naive and ignorant of parts
of science even though they want to tell
us about how science actually works so
where does Michael Nielsen come into
this well Michael Nielsen is extremely
knowledgeable about physics is extremely
proficient in being able to understand
how Quantum computation works and how
deep learning works and he has a good
understanding of technology and the and
the place at which physics finds itself
right now all this sort of stuff
bit epistemology and philosophy of
science well let's see here is a tweet
from Michael Nielsen very recently that
I held myself back from responding to
and it says quote
something I find peculiar
you take a great enormous mass of data
tied to projectiles planet Sun Etc and
boil it down to simple beautiful laws
Newton and then gather even more data
perihelion effect special relativity Etc
and boil it down to simple beautiful
laws general relativity end quote and so
here we have in pristine form a kind of
Defense of imperialism the very thing
that I spent a good five hours exploring
and explaining in my series on the
sources of knowledge and of ignorance
the lecture by Papa that goes through
detailing the history of empiricism from
bacon through to the time at which the
lecture was delivered and he explained
his own epistemology and why it is that
although empiricism was an advance on
previous kinds of ways of deferring to
authorities it nonetheless replaced that
kind of difference to Authority
religious authorities and so on with the
authority of the senses the authority of
observations the authority of data
Buckle Nielsen is making the same
mistake so all the progress that popper
made the advances that Papa made have
been ignored here now is Michael Nielsen
a special case isn't he just giving us
this man on the streets take the the
usual understanding yes he is should he
be more immune to this perhaps not
perhaps physicists don't have a special
privileged place with understanding how
knowledge is produced that's fine but
Michael Nielsen is a special case and a
special physicist why because he claims
throughout his Twitter feed to have read
the entire works of popper or at least
the major works and he claims to think
that lakotosh and pharah band Papa's
students and colleagues have more
interesting insights when it comes to
the philosophy of science and he also
thinks that Thomas Kuhn had a better
view of epistemology than properties so
that would suggest that he has a deep
understanding of popper or does it well
apparently people can read popper they
can read his his evisceration of
empirical and yet still come away with
ideas like this ideas that were refuted
decades ago ideas that come to us from
centuries ago and have long since been
overthrown by actual epistemology
epistemology that talks about how
knowledge is conjectural it comes from
within not from without but this idea
that Michael Nielsen gives us here in
this particular tweet is the old classic
idea that you take a great enormous mess
of data You observe the world and write
down your findings possibly numerically
in some way shape or form in terms of
Tides projectiles planets it's
interesting how he then slips into more
data being the perihelion effect but
also special relatives have a special
relativity a piece of data isn't that a
substantive theory that Einstein came up
with and why did Einstein come up with
this Theory
did Einstein merely collect lots of data
or was he solving specific problems
specific specific problems in
electrodynamics as it turns out trying
to figure out whether the force between
charged particles at rest was different
or the same when these charged particles
were moving under the physics that was
understood at the time it should depend
upon who you were okay whether the
Observer was at rest or stationary the
force would vary and this is why he had
to bring in this idea of special
relativity where you had a constant
speed of light which affected things
which under Galilean relativity you
didn't have a constant speed of light in
fact you didn't have an upper limit on
velocity at all go as fast as you like
but under special relativity the actual
laws governing motion you do have this
speed limit set in the universe
now I didn't respond to this I didn't go
down the road of talking about how in
fact what we do is conjecture we
conjecture our ideas our theories about
the world from within and then test them
against the reality outside this is a
different Vision about what's going on
it is the idea coming from within tested
without rather than the idea out there
somehow in reality being derived by us
from raw data in some way shape or form
now this cannot work for the reasons
that I have spent many hours going over
and although I was tempted in responding
I didn't need to because happily David
Deutsch did respond
and what did David say in response to
Michael Nielsen about this
David said quote
yeah none of that ever happened it's a
post-hoc misinterpretation caused by the
common sense appeal of empiricism which
systematically neglects the role of
theoretical problems end quote now this
is all very true it is an appeal to the
common sense of empiricism empiricism is
the common sense idea that you look out
into the world You observe it and from
your observations you derive the
knowledge
this is completely false now again
Michael Nielsen should have any special
immunity to this not necessarily except
he claims to have read Papa and
lackatosh and Pharaoh band and the
famous philosophers of Science and
moreover is writing a book about what he
idiosyncratically calls meta science
which I would just say is another term
for the philosophy of science but he is
as I said beginning this video today it
seems to be a deliberate attempt to
ignore Papa and I don't understand this
phenomena that we have in the
intellectual World in Academia they are
allergic to this straightforward
understanding of epistemology and in
speaking to people about this you know
it's hard to really figure out precisely
to put your finger on what it is about
Popper's work that really makes people
allergic to it perhaps they just don't
understand it and David Deutsch has said
not specifically on this question but on
other questions when it comes to this
kind of thing is that people tend to
read what they expect to read in a
particular text so you come to the text
you come to a book you come to an
article with a theory about what you're
going to read and insofar as the theory
that you have about what you're going to
read conforms with what you read it then
isn't refuted then you just accept it
and insofar as it does refute what
you're saying you just ignore those bits
and you continue to read through it
that's one phenomenon another is as I've
mentioned before and I'll you know and
then to drop a name here I was texting
with Naval about this messaging Navarre
and he was saying well you know the fact
is that Papa was a great critic of the
intellectual Community he was a Critic
of Academia as it exists of
industrialized type science and so
therefore of course it's not going to be
popular and I've thought this myself
over time as well if you spend your time
criticizing Academia criticizing
philosophy and your peers and
criticizing the way in which sometimes
science is done then of course you're
not going to be popular amongst the
intellectuals of any era because you're
criticizing intellectualism it's it's
similar to the way in which Ein Rand is
so quickly dismissed by University
academics it's in the same vein they
both share the characteristic of
criticizing the very people working as
experts in that particular subject area
namely philosophy and so of course
they're not popular amongst philosophers
and by extension if they're not taken
seriously by other philosophies they're
not going to be taken seriously by
scientists who come to philosophy
perhaps late in their career at some
point in their career decide to make a
little shift into philosophy but in
speaking to philosophers or reading
other philosophers realize that well
this popper fellow or this Iran woman
should they're not being taken seriously
by other academics today they're quickly
dismissed and so therefore I as a
scientist wanted to be taken seriously
now not only in science but also in
philosophy I too have better disregard
what these people have said that could
be one of the phenomena that's going on
okay so let's see what else David had to
say here about this David goes on to say
after he's just said that none of that
never happened okay so namely that
people don't you know you you don't take
enormous mess of data and distill out
the laws of physics from the data that's
not what happens you conjecture the laws
of physical then you check against some
data that you collect uh what Einstein
was doing with general relativity was
solving particular problems that's
what's going on he's not deriving the
laws of general relativity from
observations he can't see the curvature
of space-time what he's doing is solving
particular problems
David goes on to say it gives an example
for a quote for example despite what he
said about writing on photons I don't
think Einstein arrived at special
relativity by contemplating Mickelson
and Morley's observations he did it by
contemplating the conflict between
Maxwell's equations and Galilean
relativity and quote Maxwell's equations
these are the equations governing
electromagnetism both electricity and
magnetism and there were problems trying
to fit this particular theory about the
laws of physics and moving charges in
particular whether you were moving with
the charges or the charges were seen to
be moving relative to you there's a
problem with that with how the laws
predicted what was going to happen the
outcome of the particular experiments in
those particular case and Galilean
relativity Galilean relativity being
non-special relativity where in Galilean
relativity it's the common sense view
that when you have relative motion I'm
heading along the highway at 60 miles
per hour south and you're heading 60
miles per hour north and the relative
velocity between us is 120 miles per
hour time to get a liner looks like
that's common sense it's common sense
and false okay when you actually do the
mathematics according to special
relativity it's slightly different to
that and this is because one of the
reasons is well the way in which you
calculate relative velocity under
special relativity comes out different
because the speed of light is a factor
there is an upper limit on how fast you
can go according to special relativity
and and in reality you test this but
there is no such finite limit there is
no limit on how fast you can go under
Galilean relativity on special
relativity the speed of light is
constant and the Galilean relativity the
speed of light depends upon how fast the
Observer is going but of course that's
false we can test that we can
distinguish between these cases okay so
that's Michael Nielsen let's leave that
behind he's just one example among many
physicists who especially online on
social media like to opine as much on
philosophy and epistemology as they do
on physics and I don't mind people have
their ideas and this is all great it's
just that almost none are preparing
almost none understand actual
epistemology almost none are familiar
with the works of Carl poppa or with
David Deutsch and insofar as they say
they are they display by every word they
speak on the topic or tweet on the topic
or write on the topic that they don't
know the first thing about how knowledge
is actually constructed they are
allergic to the notion of conjectural
knowledge and of course they when it
comes to Poverty they dismiss him as
that guy that thinks that every single
theory that we have needs to be as a
practical matter testable right now
that he has these naive falsification as
that kind of thing and then they write
long essays as Sean Carroll has done for
example great physicist again great
visitors no doubt but when it comes to
epistemology writes things about how we
need to do away with ideas like
falsifiability because Kyle Papa was too
naive and this isn't how science
actually works and so on and so forth
but it's always catched in terms of
theoretical physics
it's always narrowly focused on
theoretical physics the same as Michael
Nielsen's concern there about how
exactly knowledge is created derived
from the data it's not applicable to
biology it's not like Darwin was
collecting data and deriving natural
selection from that now he was solving a
problem
solving a problem about the diversity of
species and the Origin of Species that's
what he was looking at he was looking at
this problem and testing to see whether
or not the observations could be
explained by this Theory a geologist
interested in exactly how it is that you
have these different kinds of rocks and
what metamorphic rocks are and how and
how you have these pre-existing
sedimentary rocks and igneous rocks and
these can be transformed over time under
the action of heat and pressure over
millions hundreds of millions billions
of years into these metamorphic rocks
this is an explanatory framework where
you're not collecting data you're not
writing down lots and lots of stuff and
extracting out of that data the idea or
the explanation of metamorphosis when it
comes to rocks and rock chemistry and
Rock geology it's only it is only the
theoretical physicists that get this
catastrophically wrong and are extremely
confident that they know what they're
talking about and they are going to pass
on their deep wisdom about how knowledge
is generated
because they think that their
misconception about how it works in
theoretical physics applies broadly to
all of science they don't tend to
consider the rest of science when they
come up with their examples it always is
at the very boundary of what we
understand they're highly mathematical
theoretical ideas that we have and it
becomes plausible in that area because
you've got numbers and you can talk
about extracting formulas from numbers
that kind of thing and so you can give a
plausible account of what
instrumentalism is and how what you're
really doing is predicting stuff I've
got this only applies to the special
case of particular physical sciences
where you're actually interested in
trying to predict the outcome of
experiments at times
this is not what science is about
broadly and the message about what
science is about broadly namely
explaining the world the phenomena in
the actual Universe in terms of what
really exists giving an account of what
really exists this applies to all
Sciences including theoretical physics
where prediction is not the main point
of prediction is just a a fortunate
thing that you can do in physics a very
fortunate thing you can do and it's
important no doubt it's important but
it's not the aim and it in fact is not
the reason why the science exists
and we shouldn't expect physicists in
general to be great philosophers as I've
already implied here but they do love it
seems more than any other scientist to
opine on the intricate details of
epistemology at times as much as they
like to I Pine on physics you know where
they spend most of their time learning
and training the actual physics and you
know they have robust resilient
knowledge
when it comes to epistemology they think
they can just dive in that they've
already managed to somehow absorb by
osmosis the way in which knowledge is
created without really carefully
thinking about it and because they don't
carefully think about it and by that I
mean really connect with people who've
made advances on this before it's like
they're working it's it's like they get
upset the theoretical physicists and the
physicist in general are the first
people to get upset with receiving
emails or reading blog posts about how
some engineer has used an algebraic
method to disprove Einstein's theory of
relativity okay and and so this is what
visitors all agree on and they all get
together and you know they laugh about
how these silly Engineers these retired
Engineers so goes the joke that have
disproved Einstein okay and it is it is
silly and I I can imagine that it can be
frustrating for physicists to receive
email after email from people who think
that they've just discovered the theory
of the universe and they want some high
profile physics to read their paper and
if only you would read my paper and read
my theory about how to unify quantum
theory and relativity and how we can
overturn Einstein here's my algebraic
method for doing so if only you would
read this you would realize that you've
been spending your life doing the wrong
thing and the fizzers laugh about this
okay the same feeling of this is an
embarrassing sort of unedifying uh sign
of ignorance and naivety on the part of
this person it's highly unlikely they're
correct and of course every physicist
knows the feeling of reading through
something like this and getting to the
end of it and realizing well you just
made clanger after clanger there you
can't disprove Einstein with a simple
algebraic argument and what you need is
a testable Theory and all this sort of
stuff the same feeling comes to the
papyrion when they read stuff from
certain physicists who if they've read
pop but they haven't understood him but
in general they haven't read popper at
all and it just comes off as super naive
it comes off as the retired engineer
trying to disprove Einstein time
and on that topic okay we we we
shouldn't be surprised that people are
ignorant of stuff and it is no sin to be
ignorant it's just that there is this
double standard out there I think in
physics where the physicists will accuse
people who aren't trained in physics of
not being sufficiently knowledgeable
about physics and so therefore aren't
entitled to have a proper opinion on
physics and it shouldn't have an opinion
on whether or not string theory is
correct or not
because they don't have the expertise in
that area but but when it comes to
epistemology oh oh better off then
anyone can have an opinion I think
anyone can have an opinion but it would
just be refreshing if people would
sometimes make contact with Papa so on
that same thing
of ignorance about this sort of stuff
Professor Brian Keating I don't really
know I admit I don't know him but he's
well let's just read yes written here
quote Feynman and he's quoting Fineman
science has the belief in the ignorance
of experts
and then he goes on to say Professor
Brian Keating himself truth is all
scientists are ignorant at some level
some are more ignorant than others
science is the worst form of
epistemology except for all the rest end
quote well
yes all scientists are ignorant at some
level how about all scientists like all
people are infinitely ignorant there's
on every any topic that we do know about
any topic whatsoever
that topic we can be infinitely ignorant
about and we're infinitely ignorant
about everything else as well some are
more ignorant than others well some are
more knowledgeable and have more
specialty in certain areas than others
but again we're all equal in our
infinite ignorance as Popple would say
so yeah this idea that
it's trying to set up a hierarchy you
know some physicists are good and some
physicists are not so good and you know
okay some fears is no more than others
big deal
I just think the I think the emphasis is
in the wrong place rather than trying to
have this hierarchy of people where some
know more than others as Papa would say
while differing in this little bits and
pieces that we do know we are all
equally infinite ignorance it's better
to just concentrate on the fact that
we've all got an infinite amount to know
and so we need to be humble in the way
that people of course now might be
screaming at the screen saying well you
Brit Hall you're not being very humble
you're having a go at these you know
prominent physicists you know who know
what they're talking about they they do
physics but you know it is clear that
these people don't necessarily know what
they're talking about like the very next
line science is the worst form of
epistemology except for all the rest end
quote the science is not a form of
epistemology science is a subject area
epistemology is a separate subject area
science deals with theories about the
physical world epistemology deals with
how it is that knowledge is created
these are two separate domains science
doesn't tell you how the knowledge in
science is created science is that very
thing trying to figure out how the world
works the physical world when it comes
to knowledge that's the domain of
epistemology and that is what Pablo was
an expert in popper was an
epistemologist of the first order and he
explained how it is that we can inject
your ideas and then we attempt to refute
those ideas and insofar as they survive
attempts at refutation and they in David
deutsche's terminology are hard to vary
good explanations of the world then we
accept them as part of our corporates of
knowledge but even if they go and become
refuted they can still remain knowledge
and all this sort of stuff
viewers and listeners to top cast will
know this and I'm just emphasizing here
that
again it is a peculiarity I find of
physicists of theoretical physicists in
particular but all kinds of physicists
who are extremely confident in
demonstrating their complete ignorance
when it comes to the field of
epistemology and the philosophy of
science and you know I I have remained
rather polite in the face of you know
reading over and over again the
physicists proclamations about how
knowledge is produced and they always
give us the same kind of stuff they
always give us the same old empiricism
the same old empiricism without ever
grappling with how knowledge is
genuinely been create being created our
knowledge is actually created okay so
sometimes they're Bayesian in the way
that I look at things but it still comes
down to we are observing stuff and
you're extracting Knowledge from the
observations in some way you're deriving
it from the observations rather than the
observations serving the purpose us
serving the purpose of deciding between
the theories you've already guessed that
that's it or as being the explicandom
the thing that you are explaining you're
explaining the observations the
explanation is coming from within you
and you are imposing that explanation
upon reality you're not you're not
drawing it out of reality it's not out
there in reality after all if it was
going back to Michael Nielsen's thing if
we're extracting the knowledge from the
data then why does the data contradict
itself on the one hand it says well
Newtonian mechanics is the explanation
of this data but the same data from the
same reality effectively the same data
okay a little bit more data completely
contradicts what is being said in that
first case in other words we have
special relativity we have general
relativity on the on the one hand we say
well gravity is a force that travels
instantly between bodies and on the
other no gravity is not a force the
curvature space time and it most it can
travel at the speed of light on the one
hand we say there is no upper limit on
how fast objects can travel through
space and on the other we can say well
no the speed of light is a universal
limit throughout the Universe these
things conflict with each other and
we're not drawing those facts we're not
deriving those facts from reality we are
conjecturing them from within and then
testing them against that reality and
because we know that our conjectures our
guesses can be flawed and should be
flawed and will be incomplete that they
will always eyes be a gap between what
actual reality is and what our knowledge
of reality is we should expect the
theories that we have to sometimes
conflict because they won't be the
complete picture they will always be
errors within them there will be
uncertainty we are fallible and so
therefore our theories will be
incomplete because they cannot be
perfect representations of reality
reality contains no contradictions but
our knowledge of reality will absolutely
contain contradictions and that is one
of the problems that we want to solve as
we make progress and it's the way in
which we can make progress but you won't
be able to account for any of this if
you're an empiricist if you're a
Bayesian it won't make sense to you only
under popular in epistemology where we
have a source of ignorance as well as
the source of knowledge coming from
within us as explained again in that
five hour series that I did will you be
able to account for both the error
within your knowledge and the truth
within your knowledge the both of these
come together in lockstep and the more
you learn you know going all the way
back to Socrates the more that you come
to understand the more is revealed to
you about what you don't understand your
ignorance actually increases your
knowledge of your ignorance increases as
you learn more this is the the fact that
it sounds like a contradiction but it's
not okay that'll do on physics and
physicists and that kind of epistemology
for now let's move on to a couple more
interesting tweets that again came
across my feed recently one was from
awesome Lake who tagged me by saying uh
I can imagine both David Dodge Oxford
and top teacher commending this View and
this view was by a fellow called Gregory
Hansel and Gregor Hansel said quote
Liberty democracy and Free Speech are
conditions that allow for human
flourishing even more than techno
Capital they facilitate the
proliferation of human life and ideas
end quote yes absolutely I mean you
could have lots and lots of Capital lots
and lots of money invested in technology
in a place like China and yet use it to
actively suppress Liberty democracy and
Free Speech Liberty democracy and Free
Speech I would add are special cases of
something deeper special cases of what
David Deutsch has told us in his work on
optimism a culture of criticism a
culture of criticism or tradition of
criticism a tradition of criticism is
this thing that stands against all other
kinds of traditions that hitherto have
existed on planet Earth Traditions were
ways of keeping things the same but
attrition of criticism is a way of
ensuring that you have progress or
change which is stable over time stable
because it's a tradition but because the
tradition of criticism the criticism has
the effect of distinguishing between
good and bad ideas and ideas that allow
for progress and ideas that stunt
progress and if you have this pan
Opticon view of criticism you apply
criticism applied to everything then
you'll have improvements everywhere and
you will have Liberty democracy and Free
Speech these are just special cases
special cases of this deep phenomena
known as the tradition of criticism
which is part of the Enlightenment and
and and at their best this is what
western Nations allow now uh it would be
my opinion that over the last few years
we have had a problem with the tradition
of criticism and some of the Traditions
that hitherto mind you here the two we
have defended robustly defended have
come under attack and so there has been
uh certain kinds of clampdowns on Free
Speech certain kinds of clampdowns on
Liberty and even democracy and there's
been anti-democratic terms now are these
existential threats to democratic
Western nations in the enlightenment
tradition no I don't think these are
existential threats but they are threats
nonetheless and their annoyances more
more than anything else in some places
they are far worse than others you know
you look at a place like New Zealand
where you really do have a clamp down on
free speech and Liberty and then you
compare it to you know the southern
states of the United States and you you
don't okay and then there's everywhere
in between those but broadly speaking
none of our countries are anything like
China okay despite what certain people
uh let's say on the the conservative
rights might have you believe it's not
that bad yet but I think we need to
defend Liberty and democracy and Free
Speech whenever it gets threatened
whenever it gets written whenever anyone
is out there criticizing a tradition of
criticism criticizing a means of
criticism then we should criticize that
we should criticize any attempt to say
that a free speech is somehow violence
okay this is the the Trope that keeps
being wheeled out over recent times or
even if they say that these people
support democracy if they try and enact
so certain anti-democratic measures
where you can have for example unelected
officials making decisions and those
officials cannot be removed cannot be
removed by any vote and are resistant to
being removed that tend to have more
power than elected politicians this is a
problem especially when we get into
supranational organizations like the
world economic forum and the United
Nations that kind of thing where the
people there are unelected and yet well
to some extent they're unelected by the
people over whom they are ruling broadly
speaking and so this is where we have
the undemocratic idea where even if you
have ostensibly some sort of voting
system
but what really goes on what really
tends to happen is that the people who
are subject to the rules
cannot remove the rule Earth the people
making the rules and this is certainly
seems to be the case with the world
economic Forum where the supranational
organizations are telling democratic
nations what they can and can't do and
the democratic nations the politicians
are signing on to certain agreements
where it's very difficult to get out of
these agreements real problem real
problem okay the EU is a similar sort of
idea to this won't go down that road
right now so yes anyway
um I do commend that view Liberty
democracy and Free Speech are the
conditions that allow for human
flourishing but there's something deeper
still it is the tradition of criticism
that really allows for human flourishing
and this idea of techno Capital you know
suddenly wealth is very very important
but again wealth is derivative
derivative of all that other stuff it is
the thing that comes later which then
you are able to use to make your
tradition of criticism even more robust
but it is a consequence of the tradition
of Christian the most rapid wealth
creation is due to capitalism and
capitalism is and then free trade uh a
specific species of the tradition of
criticism as applied to trade as applied
to transactions between individuals in
particular moving on and uh an
interesting one from tadas is his handle
and he has asked the question
um
I think just broadly to a number of
people how do we quantify or know the
amount of knowledge creation okay and
and my opinion on this in answer to his
question was that there's no known unit
of knowledge I said that one must use
proxies information processing and let's
say in terms of floating Point
operations per second which is you know
flops might give some indication but
it's only rough there is also I suggest
a difference in quality between
different kinds of knowledge which is
harder to track
and quite quoting myself so what I mean
by that is um sometimes people talk
about this they want to know how fast it
is that we are creating knowledge and
can we measure it and all this sort of
stuff well we don't have a
we don't have a unit of knowledge and so
because we don't have a unit of
knowledge you know the um what would we
call it the pop-up
or the cowl or something like that
you know at the moment that's the rate
of um you know two Carls per second of
knowledge creation or something like
that okay then you joke but there's a
point here you can't measure something
unless you've got a unit of it and then
once you say you're going to measure in
a measuring device and all that sort of
stuff so to quantify this thing it'll be
difficult but let's say you could isn't
there a difference between deep
foundational knowledge and just more
derivative knowledge so you know
something like Darwin's theory of
natural selection that contains deep
deep knowledge and it's deeper and in a
sense it's a higher quality kind of
knowledge compared to something like um
you know a biologist who would also be
interested in you know evolution by
natural selection who happens to be an
ornithologist working in the Amazon
rainforest and he's you know discovered
three different species of toucan okay
so that that bit of knowledge the three
different species of toucan well you
know how much knowledge is that what
does that count as as compared to the
Deep knowledge about evolution by
natural selection well the evolution
Financial selection knowledge is a deep
foundational Theory the new three
species of toucan is a very derivative
high level thing that you know uh
doesn't really touch other areas of
Science and philosophy and so on and so
forth in the same way that
evolution by natural selection does so I
don't think we can quantify the amount
of knowledge creation all we can do is
have proxies about how uh or the fast
we're making progress at any particular
time given a particular technological
metric or something like that you could
you could say oh no how many books are
being published each year maybe that
would give you an idea but not really
you know how many um how many YouTube
videos are being uploaded but a lot of
them are entertainment they're not
really producing knowledge
all these sorts of things so this is why
I say you know if you're looking at
something in particular like you know
clock speeds of processes amount of
memory in a laptop something like that
would be a proxy for how much progress
we're making which is a proxy itself for
the amount of knowledge creation that's
going on so that would that that would
be my answer to that we can't quantify
knowledge but we can quantify certain
proxies which are related to knowledge
creation
um I might just mention the one that
came across my feed as well by me
um this is from the talk at talk physics
um bot that randomly generates tweets
based upon things I or Naval or David
Deutsch have said or written at some
point or other and anyway it's quoted me
and the quote is this quote there are
two equally important ways to be in the
world when it comes to the process of
knowledge creation you can be a Creator
and you can be a Critic end quote yes
and it's important for me to emphasize
this that you know I've written and
spoken a lot about
um creativity and criticism that the two
pillars of knowledge creation
and in this sense
creativity is just creating something
without knowing whether or not it's
going to be a genuine Improvement when
it's a genuine Improvement we use words
like Innovation something like that so
it actively improves on something that
has gone before sometimes your
creativity can be worse than the
existing idea so this is why you need
criticism but criticism itself is a
creative act so really really there is
only creativity there's only creativity
and one species of creativity is known
as criticism but you have to be creative
to come up with a criticism but if
you're teaching you know schools are
obsessed by this and universities are
obsessed by this but now right now the
idea of critical and creative thinking
and I don't think that you can really
facilitate creative thinking you can't
enhance it very easily we don't know
enough about it except to give people
freedom and perhaps provide some
constraints on what they want to do you
know so saying to a child do whatever
you want okay that's maximum creativity
maximum scope for creativity but
sometimes it's helpful to actually say
okay do whatever you want but make sure
it's a poem
that can help Okay well now we're
focused on something do whatever you
want but make sure it's a palm and it
consists of seven lines and it's about
trees okay well now you know you're
helping the child actually to be
creative to try and guide them
especially if they say they don't know
what they want to do you provide some
some rails within which they can more
actively explore the area because if the
space is infinite it's very difficult to
constrain your own thoughts at times and
then maximum space to explore sometimes
isn't the thing that allows you to
actually achieve something because you
are paralyzed by too many options
now so that's one issue so it's
difficult to to train someone to be more
creative you just have to give them the
space to be creative but the space need
not be infinite criticism I think is
something that can be more readily
learned by learning about the process of
epistemology by learning about aspects
of philosophy and learning about
techniques of refutation this is what
background knowledge is background
knowledge consists of the stuff that
Humanity has figured out
stuff that solves a problem already and
can be used to criticize any new idea
that you have not to say not to try and
prevent you from being creative but so
that you don't well going going back to
my first you know a couple of tweets
that I was criticizing there so that you
don't make clangers you don't make the
same mistakes that have already been
made before you know you can you can
build on actual knowledge rather than
recapitulating from the ground up stuff
that people already know far better to
stand upon the shoulders for Giants see
further and solve more problems than
solving the same problem that Einstein
solved okay if you're learning that's
fine okay solving the same problem that
you know people prior to Papa you tried
to solve okay coming up with Bacon's
idea of epistemology to return to this
to return to that it's not solving any
new problem it's it's achieving nothing
more than what Francis Bacon did back in
the 1600s or the 1700s whenever it was
around so far better to to to move
forward okay and so the way to do this
is to be a good critic to learn to be a
good critic and that that involves
having a significant amount of
background knowledge okay the more the
better and to learn techniques whereby
you can criticize your own ideas as well
not only in light of background
knowledge but having heuristics okay is
the thing logical does the thing is it
experimentally testable uh how would you
go about experimentally testing it is
there a mathematical way of refuting
this and so on and so forth all that
sort of the ideological fallacies in the
argument that you're making all this
sort of stuff can be learned it's not to
say it needs to be learned off by heart
but certainly the more that you know
about this kind of thing the clearer I
think you might be everyone is plagued
by misconceptions but it is it is
excruciatingly obvious to everyone that
someone like David Deutsch is a clear
and perceptive thinker now why he has
heuristics many of which will be
implicit but he will have he has deep
knowledge about these things it can be
learned it can be learned but it takes
effort it takes attention and it takes a
willingness to understand the people
that have gone before and who have made
some progress of reading the right kind
of stuff what is the right kind of stuff
again popper would come to mind Einstein
fireman Iran all of these guys that are
out there and girls a lot of these
people that are out there that have
actually made progress and in in some
way uh standing in opposition
to the multitudinous ways in which
Academia and the intellectual culture at
the moment believes things okay what
they think about knowledge and so on and
so forth not to say they're all wrong
and completely wrong in all ways but if
you want to make progress agreeing with
everyone around you is probably not the
way to do that because everyone around
you will be doing the same thing as you
then you want to be doing something
slightly different and I'm quoting
myself again here just to explore this
it's a little embarrassing I should have
picked a few more tweets but let's just
go with this
he has no shame
um so what I've said here and quoting
myself a prediction made in the absence
of a good explanation is a prophecy end
quote from Top teacher so yes I've said
that now I should explain that a little
bit more now that's a nice little
aphorism to be precise a prophecy is I
guess about the future where you are
assuming you know what the growth of
knowledge is going to entail
so you don't know the growth of
knowledge you don't know what knowledge
is going to be created tomorrow so if
you try and presume that you do you're
making a prophecy if you're presuming
that human Choice cannot possibly
intervene that there can be no
explanation which will cause people to
choose something which will affect the
outcome of your prediction you're making
a prophecy okay so the classic example
that we go to is of course
astrophysics you know in in seven
billion years so the astrophysicists
calculate that is when the sun will
finally run out of hydrogen fuel
and it will the core will be left with
helium at which point the sun will
collapse because no new heat is being
produced in the core of the Sun the
whole thing will collapse falling in
onto the very hot core at which point
the core will heat up because all of
this in-falling matter is causing
compression of that fluid of that gas
the temperature rises and you get what
is known as the triple Alpha reaction
the helium Flash and the helium then
begins to convert itself into carbon and
that reaction the the reaction of three
helium nuclei to produce one carbon
nuclei occurs at a much higher
temperature than the previous reaction
which was hydrogen being converted into
helium that that fusion reaction and so
because the helium reaction being
converted into carbon occurs at such a
much higher temperature 10 times
temperature or something like that the
sun expands out to become a red giant
this is what will happen in seven
billion years
or will it because if people are still
here on the Earth orbiting the Sun they
might decide to do something about that
to stop it they might have decided to do
something long before that to prevent it
from happening taking Mass away from the
Sun who knows what they might do at that
point if they want to keep the sun
burning for longer let's say or maybe it
will burn even shorter than that because
they decide to take some of the material
away from the Sun to do other stuff with
it who knows what will happen you can't
guess what people will do billions of
years from now with the knowledge they
will have how powerful they will be how
wealthy they will be what they'll be
able to do with stars guessing what they
will do billions of years from now is
prophecy not prediction and therefore
trying to guess what will happen to the
sun billions of years hence is also
prophecy the only way to get around this
to be scientific is to say assuming no
human intervenes assuming that no
knowledge can possibly affect this
assuming that people do not become
involved in how the son of evolves over
time then then and only then we predict
that in the absence of all knowledge
creation the absence of all people doing
anything whatsoever then the sun will
expand into a red giant in approximately
seven billion years okay then that's
fine you've caveat that it's all in
terms of error and uncertainty which is
this scientific thing to do but as David
Deutsch has said in the beginning
Infinity words the effect of a result
quoted without uncertainty is
meaningless in science and so this would
include something like a prediction such
as or a measurement such as the sun will
last us in a billion years more
okay I think I've talked for enough
today just it's kind of a short sweet
one today me talking faster the camera
and perhaps being
a little bit lacking in generosity for
some of the subjects and a little bit uh
unashamedly quoting myself here
that will do for now and you know in the
promise that in uh within a couple of
weeks I'll have the next chapter of the
fabric of reality out but until then
bye-bye
oh oh
hey
[Music]
foreign